# ICS Visibility, Detection, and Response (GIAC Response and Industrial Defense (GRID))

## Section 1 - ICS Cyber Threat Intelligence

### The Industrial Cyber Threat Landscape

* Hyped-up Stories
* The Threats Live in our world - Changes Made Attacks Possible
* Once Upon a Time: Heterogeneous OT
* Heterogeneous Pros and Cons
* Where are we now: Homogeneous OT
* The Adversary View
* Capability Proliferation and High-Consequence Attacks
  - Human-Machine Interfaces (HMIs) are the dashboards operators use to control physical industrial machinery. Securing them requires a mix of physical and digital tools to block attackers from altering or shutting down critical factory processes.
* The Eras of Industrial Control System Targeted Attacks
* ICS-Focused Operations across the Eras
* ICS-Specific Malware Families

### Case Study: Stuxnet

* Historical Background of Iran's Nuclear Attack
* Enter Stuxnet
  - Stuxnet is a highly sophisticated, state-sponsored computer worm discovered in 2010 that is widely considered the world's first digital weapon. Jointly developed by the United States and Israel as part of "Operation Olympic Games," its primary objective was to sabotage Iran's nuclear program by physically destroying uranium-enriching centrifuges.
* Network Observable Qualities
* Wireshark Capture of Stuxnet-Infected WinCC Server
* Some Host Observable Qualities

### Introduction to Active Defense: Visibility, Detection, and Response

* The Sliding Scale of Cyber Security
* The Sliding Scale's Return on Investment Pyramid
* Active Cyber Defense Cycle
* Lesson Learned: Visibility and Threat Detection
* Lesson Learned: Incident Response
* Lesson Learned: Threat and Environment Manipulation
* Lesson Learned: Threat Intelligence
* Active Cyber Defense Cycle in ICS515
* Course Scenario: The City-Calistoga

### Cyber Threat Intelligence Primer

* Active Cyber Defense Cycle: Phase 1
* What is Intelligence?
* Intelligence Life Cycle
* Relationship of Data, Information, and Intelligence
* Field of View Bias
* Field of View Biases Impact Analysis
* Classic Intelligence Story
* Who Creates Intelligence?
* What Is a Threat?
* Cyber Threat Intelligence
* So, What Do Intel Analysts Do Anyway?
* What Does Threat Intelligence Look Like?
* Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures
* Intended Audience
* (IT) Kill Chain-Intrusions
* Make It Easy for Defenders
* Activity Groups
* Creating an Activity Group
* Activity Group Example: VOLTZITE
* Voltzite Attack Path
* An Expanding Threat Landscape-Activity Groups
* Developing Your Analyst Skills
* Causal Relationship Case Study: Illinois Water Utility

### Thought Exercise: Analysis of Competing Hypotheses

* The Scenario
* The ACH Process
* Hypotheses
* Evidence
* Diagnostics
* Refinement
* Inconsistency
* Sensitivity
* Conclusion and Evaluation

### The ICS Cyber Kill Chain

* Adaptation of IT Kill Chain Needed for ICS
* ICS Cyber Kill Chain: Stage 1 - Intrusion
* ICS Cyber Kill Chain: Stage 2 - ICS Attack
* ICS Cyber Kill Chain Across the Network
* Stuxnet in the ICS Cyber Kill Chain
  - [Control Systems are a Target](https://www.sans.org/posters/control-systems-are-a-target)
* Stage 1 ICS Cyber Kill Chain vs. IT Intrusions
* Understand *Your* Threat Landscape
* Recommendations: The SANS ICS Five Critical Controls
  - [The Five ICS Cybersecurity Critical Controls](https://www.sans.org/white-papers/five-ics-cybersecurity-critical-controls)
* Threat Intelligence Generation vs Consumption
* Public Reports vs. Intelligence Reports
* How should threat Intelligence Be Measured?
  - Complete, Accurate, Relevant, Timely
* What Should Threat Intelligence Do for ICS?
* Example: ICS Vuln Patching
* Sample CTI Use Cases

### The ICS Information Attack Space

* Threat Pool (Continued Growth in Two Dimensions)
  - IT/OT Convergence
  - IT/OT convergence connects physical industrial machines to digital business networks. It merges OT (Operational Technology, which controls physical equipment like factory robots) with IT (Information Technology, which handles data like emails and databases). This allows companies to use real-time data to stop machine breakdowns before they happen.
  - Breaking Down the Two Worlds
    - OT: The brawn. These are sensors, valves, and motors running a factory floor. They use older, specialized languages.
    - IT: The brains. This is the cloud storage, business software, and cybersecurity networks. It uses standard internet language.
* Common TCS Attack Resources and Vectors
* The Information Attack Space

### Thought Exercise: The ICS Information Attack Surface

* Source of Open Source Information
* Information Attack Surface Demonstration
* PR Documents
* Partnership Announcements
* Fully Automated Brewing Control System for an Emergent Beer and Country
* Layout of the Network
* Company Information and Websites
* Job Descriptions and Skills
* Honeywell Advisory
* Search Results: ICS Assets
* Allen Bradley SLC Processor
* How Advanced Does Advanced Need to Be?
* Put It All Together

## Section 2 - Visibility and Asset Identification

### Section 2 Objectives and Course Scenario Goals

* Active Cyber Defense Cycle (Phase 2)

### Case Study2: Bhopal Disaster

* Bhopal Industrial Disaster Overview
* MIC Process at Bhopal
* MIC P&ID
* Timeline of Bhopal Disaster
* Root Cause Analysis
* Key Themes and Lessons Learned Applied to Cybersecurity

### Asset Inventories and Collection Management

* Importance of ICS Asset Identification
* Identifying ICS Assets
* Example of an Asset Inventory Record
* Asset Identification on a Limited Budget
* Physical Inspection
* Configuration Analysis
* Traffic Analysis
* Active Scanning
* Case Study: "Passive" and "Active" Safety Systems
* Case Study: Water Distribution
* Building a Collection Management Framework
* Example Collection Management Framework
* Approach to Building a CMF
* Develop New Requirements
* Develop a Control Plan
* Implement
* Test
* Update a Control Plan
* CMF Adaptability
* A CMF + Security Controls as a Collection Profile

### Course Scenario: C3PO-Intro to Electric Operations

* Bulk Electric System Interconnections in the US
* System Frequency
* A Power System
* Your ISC515 Power System
* Site Tours and Operations Discussion-Generation
* Generation Facility Systems of Systems
* Generation Facility Inputs, Interactions, and Outputs
* Site Tours and Operations Discussion- Transmission
* Transmission Substation Functions
* Site Tours and Operations Discussion- Distribution
* Distribution Operations
* Site Tours and Operations Discussion- Control Centers
* Control Center ICS Applications

### ICS Network Visibility and IT Discovery Protocols

* IT Discovery Protocols
  - Passive analysis
* Wireshark Endpoints
* Wireshark Conversations
* Using Wireshark Statistics
* Wireshark Protocol Hierarchy
  - DCE/RPC (Distributed Computing Environment / Remote Procedure Call) is a networking protocol that allows a program on one computer to execute code on a remote computer without worrying about network details.
  - OPC (Open Platform Communications) is the standard interoperability protocol used in industrial automation to allow hardware devices like PLCs, sensors, and pumps to securely share data with software systems like SCADA, HMI, and ERP platforms.
* ARP and ICMP
* NetBIOS and SMB
  - Name, Datagram, Session
* NetBIOS Name Service
* DNS and MDNS
* Link-Local Multicast Name Resolution
* Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
* Link Layer Discovery Protocol and SNMP
* HTTP/ HTTPS
* Telnet and FTP
* Course Scenario Goals (Calistoga Refinery)

### Case Study: Ransomware and Prevention Actrophy

* Ransomware and Its Evolution
* Ransomware in ICS
* ICS Tailored Ransomware
* Prevention Atrophy
* Where Visibility Can Help
  - Visibility, Detection, Focus Areas

### ICS Protocols

* Protocol Payloads
* Modbus TCP Breakout
  - Modbus Port Details
    - IANA Assigned: The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) explicitly reserved port 502 for Modbus protocol traffic.
    - Cleartext Traffic: Traffic sent over port 502 is completely unencrypted. Anyone sniffing the network can read the register values and register modifications in plain text.
    - No Authentication: Port 502 accepts commands from any IP address that can reach it. An attacker can send raw hex commands directly to this port to turn off equipment or alter industrial setpoints.
* ICS Protocols
* DNP3
  - Distributed Network Protocol 3 is a robust, highly reliable industrial communications protocol used primarily in the electric utility, water management, and oil & gas industries.
  - Port: TCP or UDP port 20000
* IEC 60870-5-104 (IEC-104)
  - Port: TCP port 2404, 2405
* OPC Classic
* ISO-TAP (ISO Transport Protocol)
  - Port: TCP 102
* S7COMM
* PROFINET
* BACnet
  - Port: UDP 47808
* EtherNet/IP and CIP
  - Port: TCP 44818
* Example: EtheretIP CIP Queries
* Example: GE Grid Solutions' Multilin
* Visibility for Root Cause Analysis: RTU Commands

### Case Study: DRAGONFLY and HAVEX

* What Is DRAGONFLY?
* What Is HAVEX?
  - HAVEX = a Remote Access Trojan (RAT)
* DRAGONFLY ICS Operations Timeline
* How Is It Delivered?
  - Phishing Emails, Waterhole Attack, Embedded in Installers
* Where Would It Land?
  - Level 0 ~ 5
* Who did it target?
* eWON Devices in ICS Networks
* HAVEX Communications
* The OPC Module
* OLE for Process Control (OPC)
  - OLE (Object Linking and Embedding) is a legacy Microsoft technology that allows a program to share data, embed objects, and control functions within another program.
* Sample OPC Implementation
* Why OPC?
* Who Used It?
* HAVEX Re-Examined
* HAVEX in the ICS Cyber Kill Chain
* DRAGONFLY's (Possible) Re-Emergence

### ICS Architectures and Topologies

* Various Control System Architectures
* Example: Ethylene Plant
* Schematic and Physics View
* HMI with Piping View
* Control System Architecture
* Networking Information
* Westinghouse Emerson Ovation I&C System
* Emerson Ovation for Concentrated Solar Power
* Emerson Ovation for Hydroelectric Power
* Case Study: Electric Grid Control Center
* Honeywell Experion HS SCADA System
* Rockwell Automation Plant Control System
* OSIsoft Pi Historian
* Topology Maps
* Case Study: Example Oil Rig Ballast Control System
* Case Study: Oil Rig Ballast Control System Network Breakdown
* Topologies Manually Created
* Professional ICS Asset Identification and Mapping Tools
* Educational Tool Case Study: CyberLens
* CyberLens Startup
* CyberLens Loading Pcaps
* CyberLens Processing the Pcap
* CyberLens Viewing Map

## Section 3 - ICS Threat Detection

### Section 3 Objectives and Course Scenario Goals

* Active Cyber Defense Cycle = PHASE 3

### Case Study: German Steel Works Attack

* BSI's Reporting on Steelworks Attack
* Translated Text from BSI Report
* Example Closed-Loop Blast Furnace
* Breakdown of the Attack: The Knowns
* Breakdown of the Attack: The Unknowns
* German Steelworks ICS Cyber Kill Chain
* Lessons Learned

### ICS Threat Hunting

* Threat Hunting
* When to Threat Hunt
* A Practical Model for Threat Hunting
* Purpose, Scope, Equip, Plan/Review, Execute, Feedback
* Generating Hypotheses (Scope)
* Sample ICS Threat Hypotheses (Scope)
* Example: DRAGONFLY and Calistoga CMF (Plan/Review)

### Threat Detection Strategies

* Threat Detection-The Goal
  - Detect Issue, Investigate, Respond
  - Keep Baseline
* The Four type of threat detection

| Environment | Threat |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| Modeling | Threat Behaviors |
| Configuration Analysis | Indicators |

* Threat Behavior Example
* Use Cases
  - Threat Detection, Forensics, Scoping, Amplification
* MITRE ICS ATT&CK
* MITRE ATT&CK for ICS and Threat Groups
* XENOTIME in Depth-Analytical Depth
* XENOTIME in Depth-Analytical Breadth
* Gaining Coverage and Identifying Gaps
* Threat Coverage (Kill Chain Coverage)

### Case Study: SANDWORM and BLACKENERGY 2/3-Ukraine 2015

* Case Study: SANDWORM
* BlackEnergy
* Sandworm Exploit
* Different Targets, Different Approaches
* Sandworm Campaign
* BlackEnergy2 and 3 ICS Cyber Kill Chain
* The Incident
* What Are Power Grids Like?
* Ukraine Power Outage ICS Cyber Kill Chain
* Ukraine Power Outage
* Active Cyber Defense Cycle Takeaways

### ICS Network Security Monitoring

* [Industrial Network Security Monitoring](https://www.sans.org/posters/industrial-network-security-monitoring)
* NSM Process in Active Defense
* NSM Data Types
  - Full Content
  - Metadata
  - Session/Flow = 5 Tuple data (Source.IP, Destination.IP, Source.Port, Destination.Port, Protocol)
  - Historical/Statistical
  - Alerts
* NSM Applied to ICS
* Preparing for an Active Defense
* Infrastructure Preparation
  - A network TAP (Test Access Point) is a dedicated, standalone hardware device physically spliced into a network cable between two devices (e.g., between a PLC and an industrial switch).
  - SPAN (Switched Port Analyzer / Port Mirroring) is a software-configured feature built into modern managed network switches.
* Does Your Network Look Like This?
  - Flat Network
* Separation Is Key!
  - ICS Data Collection
* North/South vs. East/West Traffic Analysis
* Case Study: Gas Storage/Distribution Data Collection
* Case Study: Gas Pipeline L2 and L3
* Serial Protocols
* MatrikonOPC Sniffer
* Syslogs
* [Snort](https://www.snort.org/)
* Case Study: QuickDraw Rules
* [Suricata](https://suricata.io/)
* Suricata Primer
* Suricata Example
* Suricata Simple IOC Check
* [Zeek](https://zeek.org/)
* Zeek Primer
* Detecting Abnormalities
* Flow Data
* Historical Data
* Case Study: Switches Get Stitches
* Example I/O Graph from Switches Get Stitches
* Recommended Security Operations Workflow
* Recommended Detection Approaches

---

## Lab

### Lab 1.1 - Building a Programmable Logic Controller

### Lab 1.2 - Structured Analytical Techniques

* What’s happening in the ICS network
  - Malware = Repeating script, Download software, SSH/Modbus(Port 502), Domain controller
  - Insider Threat
  - Successful Log-in?

* Study Resource
  - Port 502 is the official, reserved communication port used for Modbus TCP. Modbus TCP is the main industrial language that tells machines how to work. It connects supervisory computers to hardware like sensors, motors, and controllers in factories, water plants, and power grids.
 
### Lab 1.3 - ICS Information Attack Surface

* [Google Dorking/Hacking and Defense Cheat Sheet](https://www.sans.org/posters/google-hacking-and-defense-cheat-sheet)
* [shodan](https://www.shodan.io/)

### Lab 1.4 - Maltego and Shodan ICS Heatmap

* [Maltego](https://academy.maltego.com/home?ewidget=1&setId=24058)

### Lab 2.1 Operating the Process (p.47)

### Lab 2.2 ICS Traffic Analysis

### Lab 2.3 ICS Protocol Analysis

* Wireshark Follow TCP Stream

### Lab 2.4 ICS Network Mapping

* [CyberLens](https://cyberlens.com/)

### Lab 3.1 Detecting Stage 1 Intrusion (p.125)

* Wireshark Follow HTTP stream

### Lab 3.2 Investigating Stage 2 Intrusions

* Zeek
* How to Install Zeek
  - Because Zeek is primarily built for Unix-like systems, installation methods vary by platform. Below are the most direct ways to install it.

1. Linux (Ubuntu / Debian)
  - For modern Linux distributions, the easiest method is using the binary packages provided by the OpenSuSE Build Service hosted by the Zeek project.
  - Open your terminal and run:
```bash
# Update your repository list
sudo apt update

# Install dependencies needed for repositories
sudo apt install -y curl gnupg2 software-properties-common

# Add the official Zeek repository key (Example for Ubuntu 22.04/24.04)
curl -fsSL https://opensuse.org | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/trusted.gpg.d/security_zeek.gpg

# Add the repository to your sources list
echo 'deb http://opensuse.org /' | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.p.d/security:zeek.list

# Install the stable release of Zeek
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y zeek-lts
```

Note: Make sure to add /opt/zeek/bin to your system's PATH variable after installation to run zeek from any directory.

2. macOS
  - The fastest and most reliable way to install Zeek on a Mac is via the Homebrew package manager.
  - Open your terminal and run:
```bash
# Install Zeek using Homebrew
brew install zeek
```



